Copyright and Licenses, Condition of Use for Supplementary Research Software as
described in `README.md`.

The Research Software (as defined below) has been developed by Zuse Institute
Berlin (ZIB), Takustra√üe 7, 14195 Berlin, Germany.  Hereinafter referred to as
"ZIB".

Copyright (C) 2014 ZIB.

ZIB holds the ownership rights on the software (hereinafter called the "Research
Software") that implements the procedures described in the publication mentioned
in `README.md` (hereinafter called the "Publication") unless the Publication
explicitly states that the procedure is part of the commercial software Amira.

Permission is hereby granted by ZIB, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of the Research Software and associated documentation files, to deal in
the Research Software without restriction, including without limitation the
rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sub-license, and/or
sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Research Software
is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Research Software.

Users who publish results that were created using the Software must MENTION in
their articles the Research Software, including the download website, and
a reference to the Publication.

THE RESEARCH SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE RESEARCH SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS
IN THE RESEARCH SOFTWARE.

Note that the commercial software Amira is required to execute the Research
Software. The distributor of Amira (FEI Visualization Sciences Group, 3, Impasse
Rudolf Diesel, Bat A - BP 50227, Merignac Cedex, F-33708, France) might provide
an evaluation licenses upon request.

Users of the Research Software can communicate their remarks to ZIB (Steffen
Prohaska, prohaska AT zib.de).
